# A5: Inorganic Fertilizer Application

**Source File:** `a5.pdf`

### Introduction

Coconut palm requires a continuous supply of plant nutrients for its high nut production. Supply of plant nutrients to palms is referred as fertilizer application. Plant nutrients are removed from a palm in the form of nuts, husks, fronds, and other materials in the crown.

The approximate rates of major plant nutrients removed from palms in soil suitability classes S1 and S2 giving an average nut yield of 75 - 100 nuts per palm per year shown below.
*   Nitrogen - 740 g (Urea equivalent of 1.6 kg)
*   Phosphorus - 118 g (Eppawela Rock Phosphate equivalent of 0.9 kg)
*   Potassium - 1553 g (Muriate of potash equivalent of 3.1 kg)
*   Magnesium - 213 g (Dolomite equivalent of 1.7 kg)

The approximate rate of major plant nutrients removed from palms in S4 and S5 soil suitability classes giving an annual nut yield of 50 - 75 per palm is as follows.
*   Nitrogen - 424 g (Urea equivalent of 0.9 kg)
*   Phosphorus - 95 g (Eppawela Rock Phosphate equivalent of 0.7 kg)
*   Potassium - 1248 g (Muriate of potash equivalent of 2.5 kg)
*   Magnesium - 143 g (Dolomite equivalent of 1.2 kg)

In addition to the removal by palms as above, plant nutrients in the soil also deplete due to run off, leaching, erosion, and uptake by weeds etc. The above processes lead to depletion of essential plant nutrients in the soil, which cause a gradual decline of nut yield. Therefore, soils in coconut plantations should be enriched with nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and magnesium by regular application of fertilizer. Coconut palms can be applied even with organic manures. This document presents complete details on inorganic fertilizer application for coconut.

The nutrient requirement of young coconut palms (before flowering) is different from that of adult coconut palms (after flowering). Separate fertilizer recommendations are made for young palms and bearing palms as described below.

Two sources of phosphate fertilizers, namely Eppawela Rock Phosphate (ERP) and Triple Super Phosphate (TSP) are recommended for coconut palms. ERP is recommended only for the wet and intermediate zones because its soluble phosphate fraction in 2% citric acid is low. Its dissolution rate is very slow in neutral soils in the dry zone. But Triple Super Phosphate with a soluble phosphate fraction in 2% citric acid of (45% P2O5) is recommended for the dry zone. Its dissolution rate in neutral soils is higher than that of ERP.

*Figure 1: Sri Lanka map showing boundaries of wet, intermediate and dry zones*

### 1. Straight fertilizers

Following are the straight fertilizers and their percentage availability of nutrients used for coconut cultivation.

| Type of fertilizer | Nutrient and its percentages |
| :--- | :--- |
| Urea | Nitrogen 46% |
| Eppawala Rock Phosphate | Phosphorus Pentoxide (P2O5) 28-30% |
| Triple Super Phosphate | Phosphorus Pentoxide (P2O5) 46% |
| Muriate of Potash | Potassium Oxide (K2O) 60% |
| Dolomite | Magnesium Oxide (MgO) 20% |

Following are the recommendations for application of straight fertilizers to the coconut palm at planting, young and bearing stages.

#### 1.1 Basal dressing per planting hole at the time of planting.

| Wet and intermediate zones | | Dry zone | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Type of fertilizer** | **Amount (g)** | **Type of fertilizer** | **Amount (g)** |
| Urea | 250 | Urea | 250 |
| Eppawala Rock Phosphate | 750 | Triple Super Phosphate | 350 |
| Muriate of Potash | 250 | Muriate of Potash | 250 |
| Dolomite | 1000 | Dolomite | 1000 |

#### 1.2. For coconut seedlings and young palms YPM requirements per palm in grams based on the age

##### 1.2.1 For wet and intermediate zones

| Age of palm | 6 months | 1 year | 1 1/2 years | 2 years | 2 1/2 years | 3 years | 3 1/2 years | 4 years up to bearing |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Type of fertilizer** | **fertilizer (g)** | | | | | | | |
| Urea | 190 | 235 | 235 | 305 | 305 | 375 | 375 | 470 |
| Eppawela Rock Phosphate | 420 | 530 | 530 | 690 | 690 | 850 | 850 | 1060 |
| Muriate of Potash | 190 | 235 | 235 | 305 | 305 | 375 | 375 | 470 |
| Dolomite | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 |

##### 1.2.2 For dry zone

| Age of palm | 6 months | 1 year | 1 1/2 years | 2 years | 2 1/2 years | 3 years | 3 1/2 years | 4 years up to bearing |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Type of fertilizer** | **fertilizer (g)** | | | | | | | |
| Urea | 190 | 235 | 235 | 305 | 305 | 375 | 375 | 470 |
| Triple Super Phosphate | 160 | 200 | 200 | 300 | 300 | 360 | 360 | 400 |
| Muriate of Potash | 190 | 235 | 235 | 305 | 305 | 375 | 375 | 470 |
| Dolomite | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 | 500 |

#### 1.3 For adult palms

| Wet and intermediate zones | | Dry zone | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Type of fertilizer** | **Rate (g)** | **Type of fertilizer** | **Rate (g)** |
| Urea | 800 | Urea | 800 |
| Eppawela Rock Phosphate | 900 | Triple Super Phosphate | 400 |
| Muriate of Potash | 1600 | Muriate of Potash | 1600 |
| Dolomite | 1000 | Dolomite | 1000 |

#### 1.4 For improved cultivars

CRIC60, CRIC65 and CRISL98 and high yielding palms (more than 75 nuts /palm/yr), application of 1 1/2 times the above rates is recommended.

#### 1.5 King Coconut Palms

Fertilizer recommendation to King Coconut is the same as that given in sections 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3.

#### 1.6 Toddy Tapping Palms

| Wet and intermediate zones | | Dry zone | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Type of fertilizer** | **Rate (g)** | **Type of fertilizer** | **Rate (g)** |
| Urea | 1500 | Urea | 1500 |
| Eppawela Rock Phosphate | 2100 | Triple Super Phosphate | 950 |
| Muriate of Potash | 4800 | Muriate of Potash | 4800 |
| Dolomite | 750 | Dolomite | 750 |

### 2. Fertilizer mixtures

#### 2.1 NPK fertilizer mixture for coconut

##### 2.1.1 Fertilizer mixture for basal dressings, seedlings and young palms

**(a) Young Palm Mixture for the wet and intermediate zones (YPM-W)**
*   Urea 2.0 parts by weight
*   Eppawela Rock Phosphate 4.5 parts by weight
*   Muriate of Potash 2.0 parts by weight

**NPK composition of the mixture**
Nitrogen (N) 11%, Phosphorus Pentoxide (P2O5) 16%, Potassium Oxide (K2O) 14%, (11- 16- 14)

**(b) Young Palm Mixture for the dry zone (YPM-D)**
*   Urea 2 parts by weight
*   Triple Super Phosphate 2 parts by weight
*   Muriate of Potash 2 parts by weight

**NPK composition of the mixture**
Nitrogen (N) 13%, Phosphorus Pentoxide (P2O5) 15%, Potassium Oxide (K2O) 20%, (13- 15- 20)

##### 2.1.2 Fertilizer mixtures for adult palms

**(a) Adult Palm Mixture for the wet and the intermediate zones - (APM-W)**
*   Urea 8 parts by weight
*   Eppawela Rock Phosphate 9 parts by weight
*   Muriate of Potash 16 parts by weight

**NPK composition of the mixture**
Nitrogen (N) 11%, Phosphorus Pentoxide (P2O5) 8%, Potassium Oxide (K2O) 29%, (11- 8- 29)

**(b) Adult Palm Mixture for the dry zone - (APM-D)**
*   Urea 8 parts by weight
*   Triple Super Phosphate 4 parts by weight
*   Muriate of Potash 16 parts by weight

**NPK composition of the mixture**
Nitrogen (N) 13%, Phosphorus Pentoxide (P2O5) 7%, Potassium Oxide (K2O) 34%, (13- 7- 34)

#### 2.2 NPK mixtures for King Coconut Palms

Fertilizer mixtures recommended for coconut under the section 2.1 are also recommended for King Coconut Palms.

**Note:**
*   The APM fertilizers become moist when it is exposed to air, because its urea component absorbs moisture from the atmosphere. When the mixture is wet, it is difficult either to store or apply to the soil.
*   APM should be applied when the soil surface is wet to minimize ammonia emission from urea.
*   Although dolomite should be applied to the coconut palm as a magnesium fertilizer, it is not included into the APM mixtures because urea and dolomite should not be mixed and stored. However, it is not necessary to have a time gap between APM and dolomite application. APM and dolomite may be broadcast on the manure circle and incorporated with the soil at the same time.

### 3. Application rates of fertilizer mixtures

#### 3.1 Basal dressing at planting

For each planting hole, the topsoil used for filling should be mixed with the following.

**For wet and intermediate zone**
*   YPM-W 1250 g
*   Dolomite 1000 g

**For dry zone**
*   YPM-D 850 g
*   Dolomite 1000 g

In addition to the inorganic fertilizer recommended above, application of one of the organic manures such as dry cattle manure, goat manure, seasoned poultry manure 10 kg per planting hole would be beneficial.

#### 3.2 Application rate for young palms: Young Palm Mixture (YPM-W and YPM-D)

| Age of seedling | YPM-W (g/palm/6 months) | YPM-D (Dry zone) (g/palm/6 months) | Dolomite (g/palm/6 months) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 6 months | 800 | 540 | 500 |
| 12 months (1 year) | 1000 | 670 | 500 |
| 18 months (1 ½ years) | 1000 | 670 | 500 |
| 24 months (2 years) | 1300 | 900 | 500 |
| 30 months (2 ½ years) | 1300 | 900 | 500 |
| 36 months (3 years) | 1600 | 1110 | 500 |
| 42 months (3 ½ years) | 1600 | 1110 | 500 |
| 48 months (4 years) up to bearing | 2000 | 1340 | 500 |

#### 3.3 Rate of application for adult palms

Adult palm mixture (APM - W, APM- D) and Dolomite

| APM-W (Wet & intermediate zones) kg/palm/yr | APM-D (Dry zone) kg/palm/yr | Dolomite kg/palm/yr |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 3.3 | 2.8 | 1.0 |

The above recommended dosage should be applied for palms yielding 50- 75 nuts per palm per year. For hybrid coconut, improved cultivars and high yielding palms (more than 75 nuts/palm/yr) application of 1.5 times the above rates is recommended.

#### 3.4 King Coconut

Recommendations for King Coconut are the same as given in section 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3.

### 4. Method of fertilizer application

#### 4.1 Young palms

In the early stage (seedlings up to 1- 1 1/2 years) fertilizers should be broadcast close to the palm covering the entire circle (manure circle) up to a distance of 30 cm (about 1') from its base, and incorporate it well with the soil. As the palm grows older, this area should be gradually extended (1/3 m per year) up to about 1.8 m at the time of flowering (See the table given below). Apply a mulch of dried coconut fronds or coconut husks immediately after fertilizer application (Refer 4.3). To obtain the full benefits of fertilizer application all the above steps should be followed.

*Figure 2: Manure circle with 6 feet radius*

| Age of the seedling | Radius of the manure circle (cm) |
| :--- | :--- |
| 6 months | 30 |
| One year | 60 |
| 1 1/2 years | 60 |
| Two years | 90 |
| 2 1/2 years | 90 |
| Three years | 120 |
| 3 1/2 years | 120 |
| From 4 years up to flowering | 150 |

#### 4.2 Bearing palms

Fertilizer should be broadcast in the entire area of the soil surface around the base of the palm (manure circle) up to a distance of 1.8 meters (about 6') from the base. Then the fertilizer should be well mixed with the soil either with a mammoty or fork (Figures 3, 4 and 5). Then the entire manure circle should be mulched well (Figure 5). If the weed growth of the manure circle is high it should be slashed (avoid clean weeding in the manure circle with a mammoty). All the above steps should be followed to obtain the full benefits of the fertilizer application.

#### 4.3 Mulching

Immediately after fertilizer application, the manure circle should be completely covered with materials such as weed trash, dried fronds or husks (Figure 5). Mulch helps to suppress ammonia emission from urea, suppress weed growth and conserve soil moisture in the manure circle. It also reduces soil temperature, prevents drying of the soil surface and increase organic matter content in the soil. If fertilizer application is not done at the correct time, the full benefits of fertilizer application cannot be obtained. On very steep lands that are subjected to considerable surface run-off, fertilizer should be applied in a half circle shallow basin (up to 10 cm depth) cut round the palm on the upper part of the slope. The diameters of the inner circle and the outer circle should be 0.5 m and 1.5 m respectively. After the fertilizer application in the basin it should be closed well and mulched.

*Figure 3: Spreading of fertilizer on manure circle*
*Figure 4: Mixing of fertilizer with soil*
*Figure 5: Mulching of manure circle*

### 5. Frequency of application

#### 5.1 Young palms

At least, half yearly application of fertilizer is recommended. When circumstances permit, 03 months split application may be adopted particularly for lands with sandy soils to minimize leaching of fertilizer due to heavy rainfall during monsoons. For 03 months split application, apply the half of the recommended dose given in Section 2.2.

#### 5.2 Bearing palms

Fertilizer application should be carried out annually. In areas where heavy rains are received during both monsoons and for lands with sandy soils, half yearly application with each monsoon may be adopted to minimize leaching losses. For half yearly application, apply half of the recommended doses given in section 1.3 and 1.4.

### 6. Differential Fertilizer Recommendation (DFR)

This is also known as the fertilizer recommendation based on leaf analysis. Differential Fertilizer Recommendation provides information regarding the soil nutrient deficiencies, hidden nutrient deficiencies and excess nutrient levels of palms. In this method, nutrient deficiencies are identified with leaf analysis and precise fertilizer recommendations are made by adding excess nutrients to correct deficiencies. This method is important to reduce unnecessary waste of fertilizers and help to formulate the most suitable fertilizer mixture for palms. It is important to consider that requests for DFR should be processed minimum of 6 months after the fertilizer application. The best months for taking leaf samples for DFR are January, February, June, July and August. Leaf samples for DFR cannot be taken during rainy seasons or within 6 months after fertilizer application. Growers can obtain details regarding leaf analysis services by making a request to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division of Coconut Research Institute.

### 7. Fertilizer application for irrigating palms

If coconut palms are irrigated, it is advisable to apply the recommended fertilizer in split doses with the supply of water. The water soluble fertilizers such as Urea and White Muriate of Potash could be applied with water while insoluble fertilizer such as Eppawala Rock Phosphate, Imported Rock Phosphate and Dolomite are applied separately to the manure circle.

**Soils and Plant Nutrition Division January 2018**

***
