# A7: Nutrient Deficiency Symptoms and Remedial Measures

**Source File:** `a7.pdf`

Most coconut growing soils in Sri Lanka are deficient in major plant nutrients which are Potassium (K), Magnesium (Mg), and Nitrogen (N). Nutrient deficiencies adversely affect the growth and production of coconut palms. Generally in acute mineral deficiencies characteristic symptoms could be detected on the foliage. Deficient nutrients could be identified at the field with the characteristic symptoms on the foliage. Sometimes mineral deficiencies can be present in palms without showing any visual symptoms. Such hidden deficiencies also adversely affect the nut production. Hidden mineral deficiencies can be identified only by chemical analysis of leaf.

### Visual symptoms of deficiencies

The most commonly observed symptoms are due to potassium, magnesium, and nitrogen deficiencies. The occurrence of phosphorus deficiency is rare in coconut.

#### 1. Nitrogen

Initial symptoms of nitrogen deficiency are light greenish color in the entire foliage. With the progress of nitrogen deficiency, fronds of the crown become yellow. (Water logging, severe drought, competition from grasses may also produce similar symptoms). Gradual reduction in the size of the crown and tapering of trunk could also be observed. In severe deficiencies, yellowing of fronds increases and turn to golden yellow and then to reddish gray before dying. Depending on the intensity of deficiency, the leaflets show uniform pale green to yellow colors (Figure 1).

*Figure 1: Nitrogen deficiency showing palm*

#### 2. Potassium

Symptoms of potassium deficiency could initially be observed in mature fronds. Scattered rust-colored spots appear all over the leaflet. The leaflets become slightly yellowish and it is more prominent towards the tip. The reddish color spots gradually enlarge and form large brown patches. Leaflet tips show distinct scorching appearance. Fronds of deficient palm appear in yellow color while fronds in the lower world appear in orange yellow. Tapering of crown is a common feature of this deficiency (Figure 2).

*Figure 2: Potassium deficiency showing coconut leaflets*
*Figure 3: Potassium deficiency showing coconut palm*

#### 3. Magnesium

Magnesium deficiency is characterized by yellowing of leaflets of the mature fronds. The leaflets would be pale yellow with a green band on either sides of the ekel. The basal areas of leaflets remain green thereby showing a green band on either sides of the whole frond. Gradually leaflet tips dry, giving the appearance of the rachis of the whole frond. Gradually leaflet tips become dry and give scorching appearance (Figure 3). At the mild stage of magnesium deficiency, the crown of the palm becomes pale yellow. When the intensity of magnesium deficiency gradually increases, yellowing of fronds in the lower world becomes prominent.

*Figure 4: Magnesium deficiency showing coconut leaflets*
*Figure 5: Magnesium deficiency showing coconut palm*

#### 4. Boron

Due to Boron deficiency the leaflets are wedded together and the tips of the leaflets appear like hooks. The lower basal region of the frond normally will not produce any leaflets (Figure 4).

*Figure 6: Boron deficiency*

**Note:** When symptoms are often due to deficiencies of more than one nutrient, it is difficult to confirm exactly based on the above descriptions. Sometimes deficiency symptoms mislead the growers due to temporary phenomenon such as continuous drought or water logging. If growers are not in a position to diagnose the cause of the symptoms, they are advised to contact the nearest Coconut Development Officer (CDO) of the Coconut Cultivation Board (CCB).

### Remedial measures

#### 1. Nitrogen deficiency

Nitrogen deficiency occurs due to suspension of nitrogen fertilizer (urea, organic manure) application. Where fertilizer has been suspended for a short period, it is necessary to apply APM (adult palm mixture) or YPM (young palm mixture) fertilizer in the normal manner to correct the deficiencies caused by nitrogen (for additional information refer CRI advisory circular A5). If deficiency symptoms appear in spite of regular fertilizer application, apply 200 g of urea per palm or 100 g of urea per young palm per year in addition to the application of APM or YPM fertilizers until the symptoms disappear.

#### 2. Potassium deficiency

Potassium deficiency occurs due to suspension of potassium fertilizer (Muriate of Potash) application. If fertilizer application has been suspended for a short period, it is necessary to apply APM fertilizer with dolomite in the normal manner to correct deficiencies caused by potassium (as recommended in leaflet No. A5). If deficiency symptoms appear in spite of regular APM fertilizer application, apply 500 g of Muriate of Potash per adult palm in addition to the application of recommended dose of APM fertilizer with dolomite.

#### 3. Magnesium deficiency

**Old recommendation**
If magnesium deficiency symptoms are visible apply Kieserite (24% MgO) as follows. The application should be continued until the deficiency is fully recovered.
*   Young palms (1 year after planting up to bearing) - 0.5 kg per palm half yearly
*   Adult palms - 1 kg per palm half yearly

Kieserite should be applied at least 3 months after application of fertilizer (APM or YPM fertilizer mixtures) when the soil is moist. If the deficiency is severe, suspend NPK fertilizer application for one year and apply only Kieserite as recommended above.

**New recommendation**
In bearing palms with magnesium deficiencies, recommended NPK fertilizer (APM) is applied to the half of the manure circle and the other half is applied with one kg of Kieserite at the same time. This application method should be continued until the palm is fully recovered from the deficiency. New recommendation minimizes the labor cost.

As a long-term preventive measure against magnesium deficiency, dolomite should be applied to adult coconut palms at the rate of 1 kg per palm per year along with NPK fertilizer application. For young palms 500 g of dolomite is recommended at six-month intervals along with NPK fertilizers.

#### 4. Boron deficiency

Boron deficiency symptoms could be observed in immature fronds of the bud region. In this deficiency the leaflets of the fronds fused together while showing zigzag nature (Figure 4). Sometimes on the base region of fronds leaflets are not formed. In the acute deficiency stage number of fronds in the crown reduces, bud region becomes black in color and stagnate the growth resulting the death of palm.

**Corrective measures**
By giving suitable treatments at the initial stage, the deficiency could be corrected. To correct boron deficiency apply 10 g of sodium tetra borate to coconut seedlings and 20 g for mature palms at 6 months interval until deficiency symptoms disappear. For fast recovery it is important to apply water to palm.

**Soils and Plant Nutrition Division January 2018**

***
